Lewis of Vancouver at her home on June the 28th 1974. Now Mrs Lewis you were born in
Patagonia South America of Welsh parents. Yes I was. And would you like to tell me a bit about
your parents and how they came out to Patagonia? Yes they came out to Patagonia under the vessel
Vesta. It was called Vesta and they were there a couple of years before I was born. What was
your father's name? My father's name was Peter Jones. My mother Mary Jones. And where have they
come from in Wales? Well father come from Mold and mother come from Abergillw. They had moved
they went to Staffordshire in England where my father worked. And then of course they heard of
these people going to Patagonia. They were just married the day or so before. They heard of these
going to Patagonia. So he said well we'll just sell out and go with them to this new country,
make a start. So they got down there and there was nothing in the port, nothing there at all,
only a few corrugated houses, zinc houses. Which port is this? Madryn. In Patagonia. Yes in Patagonia.
Well then it was sometime after that there was no no trains or anything there, nothing at all. So
they were going to build this railway. So father went out with them and of course he was the first
engineer on that railway from Madryn to Trelleu in the valley. And he was on that railway the whole
time he was there until we left to come to Canada. I forget now how many years it was now, I don't
just remember. However when we were leaving in his honour they gave us, put his first-class
coach on to take us as a family to the coast. Yes. They were only presidents and things that
rode on that coach but it was in honour of my father's work with the company. Now where were
you born? I was born in Port Madryn. Yes. And would you like to tell us where in Port Madryn
you were born? Well there was no place, it's only, there's just a sea and a few space and then the
hills you see. Yeah. Well of course it's one of these caves in the hills that I was born. And
was that where your parents were living at the time? That's where mother lived yes. That's where
they lived. There was no other place for them to live at the time. And then there was another thing,
there was no water there, no fresh water. So they had to have that brought in over the hills from
the Chippewa River to Port Madryn for drinking water. And they had to do the best they could out
of some more, what we'd call them sluice in Canada where the water stood you know. And mother said
that's the only thing they had to wash a few clothes. And when were you born there? Oh I was born there
in 1887. Yes. The 7th of May 1887. I was told in later years that I was the first white child born
there. In Patagonia. In Patagonia. In Madryn. I see. Yes. And I don't know if I should say that here. Yes.
I wonder if I should say that mother was very ill. Yes. Yes. Of course mother was very ill and
there was no one there to help at all. So of course she nursed me and she had a very bad gathered
breast. Nine gathers on her breast. No doctors. Until finally they heard there was a doctor coming
through from Royal Magro and they stopped him and he lanced these for her. Yes I was called Margaret
Anne Jones but they told me afterwards I should have been called Margaret Madryn Jones being as I
was born in Madryn. Many Welsh people do in fact have their middle name, are given their middle name
after the place where they are born. That's right there's an awful lot of them that you know that.
Yes. However there was a boy that was born in Trelleuw. He was born on Christmas Day and they
called him John Christmas Jones. Yes. Welsh was the language spoken mostly. Of course my mother
didn't speak Welsh she just understood it so we all spoke English in house. And how did you learn
to speak Welsh? Well by being among the Welsh people. I really never was very good at speaking
Welsh but I understood everything they said but yet I sang in Welsh and our choirs are all Welsh.
Could you say a few words for us in Welsh now then? Well I should say siad ach i hiddu.
Pa' i aith o chi'n siarad yn yr ysgol?
Spanish.
A chi'n cael eich dysgu trwy'r iaith ysbeineg?
O'r ddraed inni.
Y dim Cymraeg o gwbl?
Na'r Cymraeg o gwbl.
Athro ysbeineg oedd gyda chi felly neu Cymro oedd yr Athro?
Mi oedd yn un Cymro arllall yn Sbaenid. Edward o'r temps aldereti.
A beth oedd enw'r Cymro?
Yes that's it. An Athro Cymraeg oedd Aro Jones. Well Edward o'r temps aldereti he was the head
teacher. Aro Jones was like under him you see. And so Aldereti said that we would have to
speak Spanish and play Spanish and everything when we were in the grounds, while we were
in the grounds. So we used to play, now one thing we used to play, there were two rows
of us girls like this. And the one would come and say, o we bwendisus senorita, tra la
la la la la la. And then we'd go and say, ke keria sus senorita? Mantantirulirula,
yo keria una de sus ijas. Tra la la la la la. Then they'd say, kual de elias keria usted?
Jo keria a Maria. Tra la la la la la la. That's how we played.
Very good. Did you play any games in Welsh at all?
No I can't remember ever playing anything in Welsh. No. You see we went and out the
teacher told us while in the grounds it was all Spanish. Didn't want anything else. See?
Although you had to speak Spanish in school, you spoke Welsh in the church.
Well the services, I tell you we had English services in our church in the morning for
those that didn't understand the Welsh. I see.
And then at night it was a Welsh service. Of course there were some Englishmen living
in Traleo too you see. And one man's name was Mr. Theobald. Well he was a real Englishman.
He had a store there. Well he used to come to our church. Well he wouldn't come if he
couldn't understand it. So they had English in the morning and then Welsh service at night.
Yes. And did you attend both services usually? Oh yeah. Three times a day they sent a school
at two o'clock from two to four. Come home and of course mum would be home. She'd have
our tea ready. And after tea we were back in church at six o'clock. How far away from
the church did he live? Oh well no distance from the church. No. No. Why did your father
decide to leave Patagonia? Well he didn't want for one thing for his daughter to move
to Maria Spaniard. I see. And the other was that the boys when they become the age of
eighteen they would enrol them into the army. And father didn't want that either. He said
I wouldn't mind if it was just the British or the Americans but not for the Spanish army.
And were there any other reasons? Yes. A father was one of the first ones going into the
valley and he was promised a piece of land. I don't remember now how large but it was
quite a farm. Was this in Chiboot? Yes in Chiboot. And he was promised land and he never
got. Well before we left Patagonia we were in the village of Patagonia. And we were in
the village of Patagonia. We had some friends in the Spanish army and one was the commander
of the barracks. Great friend of ours. Was he a Spaniard? Yes he was a Spaniard. He came
to see us and he said Mr Jones why are you leaving our beautiful country? Well father
said one thing he said I never got the land that they promised me. Oh well he would see
about that. But then it was too late because they arranged to come to Canada by that time.
Yes father made it in mind to come to Canada. I was fifteen years old about two days after
we got started for Liverpool on board. And how long did it take you to get to Liverpool?
It took us a month. And were the conditions bad on the boat? No they were very good really.
They were very pleasant you know. When of course when they come to the equator they
had to put canvas all over the top of the boat. It was so hot. But otherwise it was
just fine. My sister was only nine months old and she started to learn to walk on board
and walk as well as she could because she'd tumbled down on the boat you know swinging.
When you got to Liverpool what happened? Well when we got to Liverpool we had the three
days to stay in Liverpool. But father wanted to go and see his sister living eight miles
out to Liverpool. So we spent one night at my aunt's and then we went across to Birkenhead
to see my father's brother living over there. And then we came back again to Liverpool in
time to catch the boat for Canada. And we were back. And we were back to the boat. And
we had to wait around until twelve o'clock that night and the train would be going east.
We got as far as Winnipeg. I believe it. No we got as far as Winnipeg. But on the way
before landing in Winnipeg there was a little baby girl that had died. And they stopped
off there to bury her in Ottawa. Then between Ottawa and Winnipeg there was a little girl
born on the train. Yes the father and the mother's name was William Thomas. And the
daughter, well she did live there in Victoria. Whether she's there now I don't know.
Now did you bring with you from South America any of your possessions? Oh yes. Yes. My mother
brought a sewing machine. A hand sewing machine. And of course the clock. You have the clock
here now? Yes we have the clock here now. And where was it made? It was really in the
UK in England. But it was made for a company in Chubut. Fabricado para Juan Iyichos. And
what is the name? Buenos Aires. Yes the people had quite a hard time when they first came
out of Canada. They weren't prepared for the severe winters. We thought we were bringing
good warm coats out from Patagonia. But there were only summer coats compared to the ones
they used in Canada. Where exactly did you settle then in Canada? Well we settled 17
miles out of Salkoos. It was named Llewellyn Settlement. Even to this day it's called Llewellyn
Settlement. That was one settlement. There was another settlement a little bit east of
the settlement. And it was called Atwater. Still called Atwater. And did your father
farm the land? Yes. Then father took up this land and he farmed. Until after the world
war because he was growing a lot of grain that time and he was able to sell it at a
good price because of the war. What did you do when you first came out to Saskatchewan?
I really didn't do anything. Did you help on the farm? Well yes of course I had to
help on the farm. Especially when dad cut in the grain and he only had a knox team and
they went fast enough so I had to walk near them to give them a poke every once in a while
to make them go a little faster to run the binder. And what about your husband? When
did you meet your husband? Oh well that's quite a different story. It seems that he
had been in when he was in Montana and he'd come over to see his uncle, the man that brought
him out from Wales. And he found out that there was quite a colony and so he couldn't
find the post office, well in post office he wanted to find it. So the first house he
came to from his uncle's was our house. And of course he got off there and of course he
asked mom the directions to the post office. Well he stayed for a little while. I wasn't
home at the time but he stayed for a little while and when I got home he was a bronco
tied right to the doorknob almost and I couldn't get in because of this awful animal that was
tied there. And I went into the house there and saw this little fellow, cowboy hat, high
heeled shoes, boots you know. Well my first, my first idea was him I thought, my he's a
funny looking little fellow. However it seems that he was a very nice little fellow. And
he'd, I don't know whether he had any ideas about me or not, I don't know. But he did
come back again and settled just in the next farm to us. Well his partner left him so he
was all alone there. Father went down there one day to see this bachelor and so he said
to him, well there's no issue living down here all alone, you might as well come and
live with us. That's how I met my husband. Help it to be. And when you married him did
you move back to his farm? No, no it wasn't his farm really, he only rented it. He rented
it from a man called Coslet Thomas. Another Welshman? Another Welshman, yes. Because he'd
gone into town, into the little town of Bangor to open a store. That was his work in South
America, store keeper. Coslet Thomas? Yes Coslet Thomas, yes. And what about the Welsh
community in Saskatchewan? Did you find that you all met together and spoke Welsh to each
other? Oh yes, we had Welsh services and choirs, choirs worth listening to. Welsh choirs. Yes,
we did. We had, we're just real Welsh colony. Did you always sing in Welsh in the choir?
Yes, yes I always sang in Welsh. Well nearly I don't think we ever did sing English, we
all sang Welsh you know. Can you remember any of the songs that you would have sung?
I'll put some of them.
When did you leave the Welsh community in Saskatchewan? In 1907, I went to Maple Creek, Saskatchewan.
We lived there for some time. Why did you leave? Well because my husband, he was more
western than anything else, he'd been used to cowboying you see. And he wanted to get
back to that kind of work. What did you think of Wales when you first visited it in 1963?
Oh I loved it. Yes it was very nice. First I went to Holywell and then they took me all
around through Carnarvon Sheer and all over and then I went to Carnarvon Castle and many
other places before I left. From there I went to London. And even though that was your first
visit after living overseas for so many years, do you still feel that you are Welsh? Well
very much so. Very much so. That's one thing that's in my blood. Why is this? Well I don't
know because I was in a Welsh colony all my life you see. Although like I said I didn't
speak it very much. I'd understood it. They couldn't say anything about me in Welsh. I
don't understand. No it's, well I don't know, I just feel very Welsh to tell you the truth.
They say well I'm Welsh. And some will say well you have the accent. Well I didn't know
I had the accent but when I hear it I can see. Yes then I met our minister here. His
name is Mr Edwards, Dr Edwards really. And when he came here to visit me I said well
I said you have a Welsh name. He said yes he said it is a Welsh name. He said, he said
I was born in Ireland and my mother was Scottish. Well I said you know you were born in a barn,
you're not a horse. Well of course according to all I was taught in my life you are what
your father is, not what your mother is. And his mother was Irish? No Scottish. And his
father? Well it was Welsh descent you see, born in Ireland. Ah ha. Yes.